Hello, hello hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English.
The show where you can listen to
fascinating stories, and learn weird
and wonderful things about the world at
the same time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today it
is the start of another three-part
mini-series on European dictators.
In part one, today’s episode, it’s
Joseph Stalin, the Soviet ruler
once described as The Grey Blur.
Next up, in part two, it's going to be
the father of fascism, Benito Mussolini.
And in part three, well you can
probably guess, it will be the leader
of the Third Reich, Adolf Hitler.
To state the obvious, in the case of
all three men, it would be impossible
to give a thorough, blow-by-blow
account of their lives and historical
impact in the space of one episode.
So, instead, what we will try to do is
give an overview of their lives and place
in history, give you a sense of the men
they were, some of the events that shaped
them, and the dark shadow that they left
over their countries and the wider world.
OK then, let’s get right into
it and talk about Joseph Stalin.
On the 16th of July 1941, advancing
German troops captured a Soviet tank
division during the Battle of Smolensk,
about 400 kilometres west of Moscow.
A 33-year-old artillery lieutenant,
Yakov Dzughashvili, was taken prisoner.
He had first removed the officer insignia,
or symbols, from his uniform and tried to
blend in with the rest of the soldiers.
Eventually, however, the man was
recognised for who he really was.
This was no ordinary Soviet
soldier: this was the oldest son
of the Soviet leader Joseph Stalin.
What a propaganda coup, what a
win, this was for the Germans.
Not only was their Operation Barbarossa
tearing through the Soviet Union, but
they had now captured Stalin’s son.
On the 19th of July, the Germans announced
their celebrity capture to the world.
And they made use of Yakov in
their war propaganda, even dropping
leaflets with photos of him, shown
smiling with Germans, over Moscow.
A couple of years later, in 1943, when the
Germans suffered some significant defeats,
Hitler offered Stalin a prisoner swap: in
exchange for a famous German field marshal
who had been captured at the Battle of
Stalingrad, Stalin could save his son.
So, what did the Soviet leader do?
Well, most parents, I think it’s
fair to say, would do absolutely
anything to get their child back.
But Stalin was no ordinary
parent, no ordinary man.
He refused the swap - and any chance of
saving his son - telling the Germans:
"You have in your hands not only my
son Yakov but millions of my sons.
Either you free them all or
my son will share their fate."
According to Yakov’s cellmate, it was
the news that his father rejected the
swap that triggered his attempt to escape
from Sachsenhausen concentration camp, an
attempt that would prove to be suicidal.
On the evening of April 14th, 1943, Yakov
made a run for the camp fence, calling
out to the SS guards: "Don't be a coward.
Shoot, shoot."
When Yakov reached the outer
fence, he was shot dead.
This story is just one of many that
underlines Stalin’s ruthlessness
and inhumanity, an inhumanity
that he would excuse and explain
as being only in the interests
of his country, of Mother Russia.
So, where did it all start?
Well, as Stalin’s name carries
such historical weight, it might
surprise you to find out that it
wasn’t actually his real name.
Joseph Stalin was actually born Joseph
Vissarionovich Dzhugashvili on the
18th of December 1878 in Georgia, which
was then part of the Russian empire.
I’ll call him Stalin from now on, not
just because it’s easier for me to
say than Dzhugashvili, but because
it’s how most of the world knows him.
And by the way, don’t worry, we’ll find
out where he got that name from shortly.
Now, the young Stalin grew up in poverty.
His mother was a washerwoman,
and his father a cobbler,
someone who repairs shoes, and a
violent alcoholic who beat him.
When he was seven years old, Stalin
caught smallpox and was left with
acne scarring and a deformed left arm.
He was bullied at school, and in
1894 Stalin’s mother sent him to
Tiflis, modern Tbilisi, the Georgian
capital, to train as a priest.
During his time there, however,
Stalin began reading not the religious
scriptures that he was supposed to
be studying, but the writings of the
grandfather of communism, Karl Marx.
He joined a local socialist group, and
spent most of his time getting involved
in revolutionary, anti-monarchy politics.
He turned his back on religion, becoming
an atheist, and by 1899 he had been
thrown out of the seminary because
he didn’t show up for his exams.
And in December of 1899, when he
was 21, Stalin took his first and
only non-political job, working as
a clerk in the Tiflis Observatory.
The job wasn’t particularly demanding,
which allowed him to be active in
revolutionary politics, organising
strikes and protests, and becoming
well-known to the Tsarist secret police.
And he was no stranger to being
caught, arrested, by the authorities.
Between April 1902 and March 1913,
Stalin was arrested seven times.
He would join the Bolshevik party
in 1903, and first met Lenin,
the Bolshevik leader, at a party
conference held in Finland in 1905.
Lenin was immediately impressed by
the young Stalin, who he saw to be
a 'ruthless underground operator.’
And it turned out that Lenin was right.
Ruthless, meaning “showing no pity or
compassion for others”, is certainly a
word we can use to describe Joseph Stalin.
During this period, he developed a
reputation as a dependable, hardworking
man skilled in the ‘day to day’
work of revolutionary politics.
He was never a great public speaker,
nor a man of great ideas like the
Russian Revolution's two intellectual
leaders, Lenin and Trotsky, but Stalin
was willing to risk arrest every single
day by organising workers, printing
and circulating illegal literature, and
robbing trains to support the cause.
While Lenin and other more ideological
revolutionaries lived abroad and
wrote books about class and Soviet
society, Stalin was on the ground
at the forefront of the difficult,
dangerous, and less glorious work
that built the basis of revolution.
For example, in 1907, he robbed a
bank in Tiflis, stealing 250,000
rubles [which is around three and a
half million Euros in today’s money].
But the money wasn’t for him, it was to
help fund the fledgling socialist cause.
After the bank robbery, Stalin
escaped to Baku, in Azerbaijan,
and it was around this time that he
adopted the name he would be known
as for the rest of his life: Stalin
- the Russian for “man of steel”.
Some say he chose it for its meaning,
and others because he also wanted
a memorable pseudonym like Lenin,
whose real name, just in case
you weren’t aware, was Vladimir
Ilyich Ulyanov, not Vladimir Lenin.
Interestingly, Stalin had previously
gone by another pseudonym in the
past: Koba, believed to be named
after a Robin Hood type character
in a 19th century Georgian novel.
With his bank robbing history, this
certainly seems fitting, appropiate,
but it was to be Stalin that stuck.
After developing his reputation as a
ruthless operator, in 1912 he got his
first big political job when Lenin
asked him to serve on the first Central
Committee of the Bolshevik Party.
The next few years saw him continue his
rise in the Bolshevik party, but the one
episode I want to highlight is a brief
period in 1913 when he lived in Vienna.
Amazingly, during his time there
he lived in the same part of
the city, at the same time, as
Hitler, Trotsky, and Sigmund Freud.
It’s not completely beyond the realms
of possibility to imagine that all
these four men might have even been
in the same cafe at the same time,
completely unknown to each other.
Shortly after returning from Vienna,
he was arrested and sent to Siberia,
where he was exiled for four years.
When he eventually got out, in
1917, he returned to St Petersburg
and found a revolutionary energy
rippling across the country.
The events of the next few years not
only altered Russian history forever,
but the political fortunes of Stalin
himself, as he went from a respected and
committed political operator on the ground
to the inner circle of Bolshevik power.
When the Russian Revolution began in
November 1917, Stalin was active as
both a political and military leader.
He fought in the Russian Civil War,
and took up important ministerial
posts in the new Bolshevik government.
His reputation continued to grow after
he helped Lenin to escape from the
Tsar’s army into Finland, and as a
reward he was brought into the inner
circle of Bolshevik party power.
Yet, despite his important role in the
revolution, Stalin hadn’t established
himself as a charismatic speaker, or
someone with leadership potential.
In his memoirs of the revolution,
the historian Nikolai Sukhanov,
described Stalin as "a grey blur,
emitting a dim light every now and
then and not leaving any trace."
Despite his lack of charisma, his
dullness, at the 11th Party Congress
in 1922, Lenin nominated Stalin as the
party's new General Secretary, and this
gave him the chance to appoint his own
staff - and those loyal to him - through
the party and build up his own power base.
Stalin loyalists were generally newer
Communist Party members, often from
working-class or peasant backgrounds
like he was, as opposed to the "Old
Bolsheviks" who were generally more
middle class and university educated.
Then, in January 1924, Vladimir Lenin, the
father of the Russian Revolution, died.
He failed to nominate a successor,
and as a result his death set
in motion a prolonged period of
ruthless political manoeuvring.
Stalin tried desperately to position
himself, but there was another,
more charismatic candidate, the
leader of the Red Army and Stalin’s
long time rival, Leon Trotsky.
Now, there have been entire books written
on why Stalin beat Trotsky to the top
job, but suffice it to say that it was a
combination of trickery, Trotsky’s over
confidence, and Stalin’s ruthlessness.
By 1926, Stalin’s supporters had
voted Trotsky out of the Politburo,
then the Communist Party in 1927, and
then from the entire country in 1929.
But Stalin wasn’t content to let
his enemies and rivals simply
“leave” the country and live out
the rest of their lives in peace.
In 1936, Trotsky was granted political
asylum in Mexico but was found guilty
of treason in a Soviet court during
Stalin’s purge of his political opponents.
And he certainly wasn’t safe in Mexico.
On the 20th of August, 1940, he was
murdered on Stalin’s orders, with an
ice-pick no less, making clear that you
could never escape from Joseph Stalin.
After seeing off, or dealing with, several
challenges to his power from factional
groups within the party and arresting,
exiling or murdering any remaining
rivals, by 1929 Stalin had established
himself as the supreme leader of the
party, dictator of the Soviet Union, and
a man with a violent sense of revenge.
With the political infighting behind
him and his power firmly established,
Stalin began to focus on domestic policy.
What would come of the
revolution, and Lenin’s legacy?
What would Stalin do with all
that revolutionary energy?
Well, in the late-1920s, the
Soviet Union was still an
incredibly poor, agrarian society.
If the Soviet Union did not grow and
modernise, Stalin feared, communism
would collapse and the country
would be overrun by capitalists.
He put into place a series of
5-year-plans, huge national initiatives
to grow and modernise the economy,
with the objective of turning it
into a modern industrial powerhouse.
After a promising start, including
huge increases in coal, oil, and
steel production, it became clear
that these plans were terribly flawed.
The “central planning” and
“collectivisation” of this period
caused food shortages and famines,
and there was a massive human
cost to Stalin’s initiatives.
In the first five-year-plan
alone, it’s estimated that
up to 8 million people died.
Stalin was aware of this, of course,
but appears to have concluded that this
was the acceptable human cost to pay for
the modernisation of the Soviet Union.
There’s a quote that is often attributed
to Josef Stalin, of “one death is a
tragedy, a million is a statistic”.
Now, there is actually no historical
evidence that he said this, but his
actions certainly suggest that he
wouldn’t have disagreed with it.
And although he was the supreme
leader of the country and had already
dispatched anyone who dared to oppose
him, during the mid-to-late-1930s,
Stalin grew increasingly insecure
and paranoid in his position.
He feared that factions of the
Communist Party and Army were
conspiring, or plotting, against him,
and he began a ruthless political
purge that made his behaviour in
the late-1920s seem tame, or soft.
From 1936 to 1939, 93 of the Communist
Party’s 139 Central Committee members
were killed, and 81 of Stalin’s 103
generals and admirals were executed.
Stalin’s secret police, the NKVD, ruled
with an iron first and encouraged Soviets
to inform on one another, accusing as many
as 3 million people of opposing Communism.
There were extensive show trials,
theoretically “free” trials of
political opponents, but they were
essentially predetermined public
trials of anyone who opposed Stalin,
which would almost always result in
the execution of the guilty party.
And for those simply sent away, most were
sent to the gulag, a collection of labour
camps in Siberia, where it’s thought
that around 750,000 people were killed.
Now we should move from Stalin’s domestic
policy to his foreign, and perhaps
the thing - besides the famines and
purges - that he is most remembered
for, the Second World War, and the
Soviet Union’s role in defeating Nazism.
Now, as you’ll know, Hitler and
Stalin were initially allies,
or at least, not enemies.
On the 24th of August, 1939,
shortly before the Nazis marched
into Poland, Hitler and Stalin made
a non-aggression agreement, known
as the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact.
Put simply, this meant that the Soviets
and Germans agreed not to attack one
another and that they would divide the
countries between them, carving up Poland.
This “non-aggression” would last
almost two years, before Hitler
decided to go back on the pact,
launching the invasion of Russia with
Operation Barbarossa in June of 1941.
And he caught the Soviets by
surprise, completely unprepared.
Stalin had reportedly been advised
as early as 1940 that the Nazis
had been planning to invade, but
had shrugged off these warnings.
He was furious at Hitler's
betrayal but did nothing, or very
little at least, for a few days.
As Stalin hid away and thought about what
to do next, the Soviet Union waited as
the Nazi army advanced towards Moscow.
Now, as you may know, this turning
on the Soviet Union was to be a grave
error of judgement on Hitler’s part,
a decision that changed the course of
World War II, and with it, world history.
Suffice it to say that it was hugely
bloody, with the Battle of Stalingrad
killing a staggering 19,000 people
a day, a total of 1.2 million people
Eventually, as you will know, it proved
to be too much, and the Soviets were
able to push the Nazi forces all the way
back to Berlin in 1945, resulting in the
eventual surrender of the German army.
OK, that is a whistle stop tour of
the Second World War, but we must
leave time for the postwar era, the
era where Stalin went from ally of
the West to public enemy number one.
It’s important to remember
Stalin’s early years, and his
dedication to the socialist cause.
Yes, he had allied with the Allied
forces, including Britain and the
United States, but he believed in a
vastly different ideological system.
They were allies in name only, and
with their mutual enemy Adolf Hitler
out of the picture, there was the
question of how to rebuild, and how
to divide, the remains of Europe.
Stalin sensed his opportunity.
He demanded that the countries surrounding
the Soviet Union should become socialist
satellite states, swallowing up much
of Eastern Europe into the USSR, and
putting up what Winston Churchill
would call an “iron curtain” between
the USSR and the rest of Europe.
After all of this territorial expansion,
Stalin found himself ruling over almost
200 million people living in the USSR.
He was more popular than ever,
after having defeated the Nazis,
but he was still deeply nervous
and paranoid about his position.
Literally millions of people were
imprisoned or executed, and by one
estimate, by 1953 three percent of the
entire USSR population was imprisoned.
1953 would be an important year for
Stalin for another reason, though.
Stalin had always enjoyed a drink, he had
been a heavy drinker, and had reportedly
stayed up until 3am in 1942 with Winston
Churchill, the British Prime Minister.
But on the 5th of March, 1953, at the
age of 74, it seemed he couldn’t keep up.
He had been drinking heavily,
and the following day, when his
attendants came into his room, they
found him sprawled out on the floor.
Initially, they thought he was
just in a bad way after drinking
lots of alcohol, but it turned
out that he had had a huge stroke.
On 6 March 1953, the announcement went
out to the people of the Soviet Union.
Josef Stalin was dead.
It was, to state the
obvious, a monumental event.
He had held an iron grip on the
country for almost 30 years,
enacting huge changes on the country.
And now he was gone.
In the aftermath of his
death, his successor, Nikita
Khrushchev, denounced him.
He criticised the cult of personality that
Stalin had created, his totalitarianism,
the gulags, the executions, imprisonment
and torture of political opponents,
blaming Stalin for the millions of young
Soviets who had died at war, and the
millions that had starved because of
his disastrous agricultural policies.
And he pledged to start the
"de-stalinization" of the country,
a process that some might argue
has never really finished.
Indeed, Vladimir Putin has, in recent
years, gone on a campaign to rehabilitate
Stalin, and clearly his invasion of
Ukraine at the start of 2022 shows
Stalin-like expansionist tendencies.
Now, when it comes to any assessment
of the legacy of Joseph Stalin, on
one level, it's a complicated one.
Especially in the immediate aftermath
of his death, to many within the Soviet
Union he was remembered as a great
leader who modernised the country,
taking it from a backward, feudal
economy into an industrial and military
power capable of defeating Hitler.
To much of the rest of the world,
however, he is remembered as a ruthless
dictator, a man who some historians
have said bears personal responsibility
for the deaths of 20 million people.
He is a man who, with his favourite
little blue pencil, would stay up late
into the night and then write “execute
them all” on an official document, with
one stroke of his pencil committing tens
of thousands of people to their deaths.
No matter what his intentions might
have been, it’s clear that he was a man
who was prepared to murder, torture and
sacrifice millions of Soviets - whether it
be people starving to death in famine, or
even his own son - to get what he wanted.
Ok then, that is it for today’s
episode on Joseph Stalin, one
of the twentieth-century’s most
ruthless leaders and part one
on our mini-series on dictators.
I hope it was an interesting one,
and whether you knew a lot about
Stalin, or this was the first time
you’d really got into his story, well
I hope you learned something new.
As always, I would love to know
what you thought about this episode.
If you live in the former USSR, how
did you learn about Stalin in school?
How do you think the legacy of
Joseph Stalin is still felt today?
I would love to know, so let’s
get this discussion started.
You can head right into our
community forum, which is at
community.leonardoenglish.com and get
chatting away to other curious minds.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds, by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.